Once around iron stars.
This is a story that I came across in
reading a paper by the great Freeman
Dyson. And it's the idea that eventually
a very compact dense star composed
entirely of iron could be formed and
become the dominant type of star in the
whole of the universe.
Now, the reason for this is that iron,
iron 56 to be precise, is the most
stable of all of the possible
nuclei.
The binding energy for the neutrons and
protons held together in iron 56 is the
greatest.
Isotopes, nuclei less massive than this
tend to want to uh reduce their energy
by forming
iron and heavier ones want to do it by
splitting up. You can see this graph
here starting at hydrogen on the left
and going all the way to the heavy
elements such as uranium on the right
and the peak of the graph is iron.
Now what happens in stars is of course
that the light elements hydrogen first
of all is fused to form helium releasing
a lot of energy and then on to carbon,
oxygen, neon and so forth all the way up
to iron. And it's only in dying and
exploding stars that we get to create
nuclei that are heavier due to the
enormous burst of neutrons that result
from the collapse of giant stars. That's
when you get the buildup of heavier and
heavier nuclei but only in such extreme
conditions because they really well they
become radioactive eventually uh once
you get them to be m massive enough and
they want to split apart again.
But the creation of the elements by
fusion all the way up to iron
really is something of a quirk of
nature. It's down to the fact that
quantum mechanics allows what at first
sight appear to be impossible things to
happen. This is a process called quantum
tunneling.
If you have two hydrogen nuclei and you
try and ram them together, the
electrostatic repulsion of the two
positive charges will push them apart
again. And to bring them very very close
together takes an enormous amount of
energy and therefore a very high
pressure and high temperature
environment.
But if you do bring them close enough
together then they come within the range
of the strong nuclear force which grabs
them and forms a heavier nucleus and
that is fusion. But it's only actually
happens in stars because
the
nuclear fusion can occur early at lower
temperatures and lower pressures than
the simple mathematical theory would
suggest. The set two separate hydrogen
nuclei are able to tunnel through the
repulsive energy barrier and get
captured by the strong force as opposed
to climbing over the top of it. And
Richard Fineman summed this up very
nicely saying everything that is not
forbidden is compulsory in nature. In
other words, it may appear to be
impossible to climb this narrow energy
barrier and get close enough to have the
strong force win, but nature allows this
so-called impossible tunneling through
of the energy barrier. As long as that
energy barrier is tight enough,
essentially what's happening is that the
particles borrow some energy for a short
period of time and are able to
miraculously make their way through the
barrier without having to have the
enough energy to climb all the way over
the top. And that's a consequence of the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle that
the uncertainty of energy and the
uncertainty of the time window in which
you are examining it um must multiply
together to be non zero to be always
greater than plank's constant. So you
can borrow energy for a very short
period of time in large amounts um as
long as you pay it back again
afterwards. And the great cosmic
accountant will be happy.
And so in the core of stars where you
have more than 10 and a half times the
mass of the sun, you will get elements
forming all the way up to iron by this
nuclear fusion.
But once they
uh get to iron, they can't then release
any more energy by fusion. they will
start to create less efficient nuclei of
the heavier masses and uh that's bad for
them because it spells their absolute
doom. Once they're not generating energy
by fusion, they might be making heavier
nuclei. Uh but they soon find that the
energy is taken away in the process
sapping the star of its energy and it's
reducing its core temperature. And if
you reduce the temperature then you find
you can't do fusion as efficiently. So
you get a very rapid switch off of
nuclear fusion. Literally the core can
die in a millisecond and then gravity
wins and crushes it down into a uh
forming a supernova.
This is also just illustrated in this uh
diagram again. So the star can't sustain
fusion because it begins to cost energy
creating the heavy nuclei that really uh
energetically speaking would want to
split back apart again um and uh form
the most efficient element iron. And so
you get this rapid cooling and the star
falls in.
When the core is just composed of the
light elements, all the fusion reactions
were yielding energy. But once the iron
has built up, the probability of a
collision between two nuclei involving
one of the iron or heavier mass uh goes
up. And as the fraction of those heavier
collisions increases, you get um more
and more loss of energy and the power
output of the core rapidly falls off.
Essentially, iron and heavier elements
poison your nuclear reactor. the
fraction of energy yielding events
decreases the fraction that's sap energy
increase and the power exponentially
falls off.
So as the temperature uh
controls the rate of fusion actually the
rate is proportional to the fourth power
of the temperature. It's a very very
sensitive process indeed. So a small
drop in temperature results in a massive
drop in the rate of uh that fusion the
rate at which things are able to quantum
tunnel and stick together.
So fusion stalls out
drops away in just a few milliseconds.
The core collapses. Lower temperatures
mean lower pressures. Gravity wins. The
core implodes.
And that implosion
actually crushes the cloud of electrons.
This is the first time the electrons
really become important in a star.
Everything up to now is really dominated
by the uh protons and neutrons and the
nuclei. But the electrons are
nevertheless there in equal numbers. You
have equal numbers of negative charges
to positive charges.
But because electrons are much lighter,
they have to move a lot faster to have
the same energy. The kinetic energy of
motion is a half m the mass times the
square of the speed. So if you have a
lower mass, then v ^ 2 has to go up for
the energy to be the same. And the
average energy of a system is the
temperature. So if you want to have the
electrons have the same temperature as
the nuclei, they have to be moving a lot
faster.
If they're moving a lot faster, then in
any given small time window, they will
have taken up more space and therefore
they are going to become the dominant
space filling entity as the pressure
goes up and so they are the first
casualty when gravity starts to
overwhelm everything. they are rammed
into the protons and converted into a
neutron and a particle called an
electron neutrino is spat out. Now that
makes perfect sense because the neutron
takes up around about the same space as
the proton and about 200 times less than
the electron was taking up. So, it's
much much more efficient to pack things
together as balls of neutrons. And the
little neutrino, well, that doesn't
interact with very much very easily and
shoots out through the star, although it
does become important as an energy
carrier in the detonation that then
follows.
So you turn your ball of nuclear matter
and cloud of electrons into a ball of
neutrons and you have a neutron star and
it is the pressure of being unable to
crush the neutrons that brings things to
a halt provided uh the gravity is unable
to overwhelm that as well. Of course,
it's possible that if the star is
particularly large, the collapse will go
further. And there's a whole story about
the possibility of taking the neutrons
and forcing them to break up into quark
soup and create quark stars or indeed
collapse further to create black holes.
and I have videos all about strange uh
matter, quark stars and black holes for
you to enjoy as well.
But what happens if we manage to avoid
that fate?
You'll still get the situation where
random reactions are causing fusion of
heavy elements and sapping energy. And
so the temperature will fall and the
collapse is then all about whether
electron degeneracy alone, the pressure
of electrons can hold back gravity. And
there might be a mass at which this
works.
We know that this is in fact what white
dwarfs are. White dwarfs are stars of
lower mass where the core is unable to
overwhelm the electron degeneracy. And
usually those are carbon oxygen
dominated white dwarfs. Sometimes we've
seen a few that are pure helium and
possibly some that have slightly heavier
elements such as neon and magnesium in
them. Um but there is a possibility that
just in a few cases it's teetering on
the brink of that iron core collapse
stage. And so it could be that you had a
ball of iron formed that just fails to
collapse. You could end up in a kinetic
balance between heavy elements splitting
to form iron and fusion creating iron at
just the right rate.
And if you do this, the temperature of
course is going to drop as the uh heavy
elements are formed but be increased
again as the uh fishision occurs and the
heavy nuclei split up and gradually that
heat will be radiated away to the
environment. And so the system could
cool and freeze out
to uh being stable.
And if it did so, then the stable state
would be that anything smaller than iron
would have fused up to it and anything
heavier than iron would have fished back
to iron. So, it's possible that you
could create a ball of iron. There's a
little diagram showing how the heavy
elements like thorium and radium tend to
decay downwards. And in this particular
diagram they seem to stop at uh the
element lead isotope 208 which is marked
as stable. So we start with thorium and
it decays all the way down to there. So
why not all the way to iron? Well in
fact the reason is that we describe
these things as stable but they are less
energetically favorable than the iron
nucleus would be.
They are in fact metastable
stable
except they have incredibly long
halflife. And one particular version
bismouth 209
was uh discovered in 2003 to have a
halflife that was measured at 2 * 10 the
19 years. an absolutely monstrous length
of time, over a billion times longer
than the age of the universe.
So that's incredible. And so although to
all intents and purposes for human
operations, Bismouth 209 is stable, it's
not really, it will eventually decay.
Um, now that's not the record holder.
There's an isotope of turum turum 128
where the halflife is 7.7 * 10 24 years
and this is because it has a very
peculiar way of uh decaying uh double
beta decay involving uh the destruction
of two electrons at the same time. That
makes it a very freaky and rare process
and so it takes a very very long time.
But again, all of these stable nuclei
are subject by quantum tunneling to
decay. And that includes even the ones
we think of as completely stable like
lead 208.
And so if light elements are eventually
going to fuse and heavy elements to
fishen and end up at iron if you give
them long enough, well, the question
really was how long is long? And the
paper by Freeman Dyson about iron stars
has a whole lot of mathematics in it
where he reasons and calculates that you
could after the utterly utterly immense
time frame of 10 ^ 1,500
years see all the other nuclei either
fuse or fishision to form balls of iron.
iron stars. Absolutely incredible story.
Utterly irrelevant to anything that's
going to happen in any reasonable time
scale. And there are other theories of
the cosmos that suggests that many other
bad things are going to happen before
this. Um it may not be possible for
these things to form but the theory of
uh the processes involved in in the
nuclear reactions seems to suggest that
it is
one factor that might
interfere with the formation of iron
stars is the fact that ultimately
protons themselves might not be stable.
They appear to be every experiment that
we have uh attempted shows that the
half-life must be longer than at least
10 ^ 34 years for a proton splitting to
give an anti-electron a positron E+ and
a neutral pion. Um but 10 34 years is a
lot less than 10^ the 1500. And so if
protons can decay and then uh presumably
neutrons can also go by this route as
well then perhaps the ultimate decay
won't be to form these iron stars. So, a
fascinating prospect and uh so far into
the far distant future that I'm sure
that other factors such as dark energy
if it exists um and uh the collapse of
the universe if it doesn't um and black
holes forming instead can all influence
this. But a really really interesting
chain of thought. Uh so I'll leave it
there. Thanks for listening.